Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of
the Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Loops.
And today I'm joined by Doctor Antoine Marie. He
is a postdoctoral researcher at the Department of Political Science
at a University in Denmark. Uh We've already had
an interview on the show. I'm leaving a link
to it in the description box of this one where
we talked basically about misinformation, conspiracy theories and some
other topics. And today we're going to expand a
little bit on that and also talk about a few
more topics like for example, how people evaluate political
decisions, the sharing of fake news on social media
, gender biases in hiring processes, the repression of
free speech, political activism. And basically, as
we go through those topics, we're going to focus
mostly on the biases that arise from people having strong
moral convictions and the consequences of those moral convictions.
So, Antoine, welcome back to the show.
It's always a pleasure to everyone. Thanks a lot
, Ricardo and uh thanks a lot for having me
again. So starting with how people evaluate political decisions
. I mean, is it that they care more
about the concrete impact that certain political decisions have on
society or do they care more about the values and
perhaps symbols that drive those same political decisions? Mm
. So it's a big topic. I imagine you're
referring to uh pre print that I have with the
co-author uh I got had and brand, brand Freeland
who was my ph advisor, it provisionally called intentions
and efficiency and policy variations. But I would like
to rename maybe something like people don't care too much
about policy efficiency and they value a lot, the
the intentions are driving them. And so basically what
we're doing in that, in that pretty simple um
setup is that we present participants with like the new
little vignette that present, you know, the,
the sort of like the decision making process of a
politician or a CEO who's willing to implement a new
policy for uh for instance, I don't know,
do you know co2 emissions and you know, protect
the environment or whatnot? We provide information about the
level of efficiency or impact that the policy has its
financial cost? Is it gonna cause, you know
, the state or the or the company to lose
vast amounts of money or to save vast amounts of
money and we manipulate whether the decision maker is altruistic
motivated. You know, I, I want to
do that because I want to help the issue I
want to protect the environment versus um I really don't
care about the environment. All I'm interested in is
to improve the image of our company or, you
know, uh increase chances that we get re elected
at the next election or whatnot. And so,
so it's, it's a pretty simple setup, you
know, it does, it doesn't necessarily max out
in terms of like external validity, but it allows
us to pretty carefully manipulate factors that are seemingly of
interest in how people, you know, ordinary people
form attitudes uh about whether a political, political decision
is good or bad, you know, laudable or
not, et cetera. And what we tend to
find is that even when, even when the policy
is, is described as having, you know,
absolutely anecdotal positive impact, like less than 1% efficiency
, decreasing CO2 emissions. And when it described as
being, you know, costing a huge fortune to
the company or to the state, in other words
, when the policy is described as being vastly inefficient
, just the fact that we described the policy as
being otherwise altruistically motivated, you know, in the
way it's being implemented by the minister or, or
the CEO leads most participants to rate the policy as
being more commendable or to or to support it more
than an alternative policy that is described as being super
, super efficient, uh as you know, allowing
the organization to save vast amounts of money. But
that is described as being implemented for reasons that have
to do with the pursuit of, you know,
a good image being re-elected or whatnot. And so
we think that's a little of concern because, you
know, in uh modern societies, many of the
motivations that private actors, but also potentially public actors
have on the market in society is to um uh
make profits, is to, you know, give
themselves a good image is to potentially uh you know
, find technological solutions that will allow them to become
richer. And so if people punish or do not
support um policy programs uh policy uh initiatives, they
are motivated by, you know, the willingness to
uh make money to become richer, to have a
successful company, even when they're actually immensely beneficial for
society, even when they massively, you know,
help at solving a given problem that, you know
, humanity is facing, that's clearly problematic. And
so, well, we're just finding that in that
in, in, in those in those set of
studies that people don't seem to be very consequentialist or
very pragmatic in the way that they rate policy decisions
. They seem to care a lot about the intentions
that drive the poli political policies and they seem to
disregard a lot um the the policy impact. Now
I should specify that the way we describe the policy
impact is not completely neutral, we provide um uh
information about the efficiency in numerical format. We don't
provide graphs that is not in the current version of
the experiments. So the defense of that choice is
to say, well, you know, very often
information about political policies impact is provided in numerical format
, in journals, in newspapers, etcetera. So
it's fairly ecologically valid. But at the same time
, you could say, well, yeah, but
no surprise that people are not really reacting too much
to, you know, uh numerical descriptions of,
of imbalances in policy efficiency. Because the the mind
is not particularly equipped to, you know, give
a lot of like intuitive meaning to figures, to
big figures to represent all those of magnitude clearly et
Zara. And of course, I would of course
agree with that. And that's also one of the
arguments in the paper, we essentially say that people
tend to deviate from the principles of pragmatism when assessing
uh the political policy that we expose them to and
that we present them to because essentially the mind is
mostly shaped by natural selection to react to signals about
, you know, the value as a cooperator of
potential uh social actors. Be it the CEO be
it the minister so that people will spontaneously attend to
, they will care whether or not this or that
politician seems to be a good cooperator and they will
take into account the intentions that animates them in implementing
the policy a lot. But as for the the
the more abstract, the more delayed, the more
macro you know, level uh impact of the policy
, that's not something that the mind in two D
process is very well unfort unfortunately, and that we
think, you know, the the two mechanisms combined
we think are leading people to, to become so
uh so insensitive to, to the principles of,
of pragmatic. Yeah. A a and also I'm
not completely sure if this is relevant to the particular
context of this study and what we're you were trying
to understand there. But I, isn't it also
the case that for many, if not most political
decisions, uh people many times do not really have
access to very accurate data or perhaps sometimes it's also
very hard to predict the precise impact that specific policies
will have on society. No, of course,
I mean, 100% agreement. Uh That's obviously the
case. Um you know, a fact like is
that politician good or bad as a person, is
there more character, you know, two or three
or three in the, in the perspective of cooperating
with them? That's almost like a fact, something
that you can assess, you know, by direct
observation, by interacting with people or by seeing how
they talk, by seeing how their, you know
, claims over time are consistent with each other,
whether they do what they say and they say what
they do or what not. So that seems relatively
easy to assess but policy efficiency, not so right
. It's like very high level facts. It's often
very much delayed in time. You know, you
will only know if um a political program, you
know, meant to fight. Uh I don't know
poverty in Africa or meant to reduce inequalities or to
uh reduce unemployment or whatnot. You will only know
if it will bear its fruits in the, in
the midterm future, even in the long term future
, it interacts like a zillion number of variables in
the national economy and in the global economy that you
have no control over, it's extremely hard to run
randomized control trials on economic outcomes or, you know
, public policies, everything interacts with, with a
bit of everything. Of course, economists are skilled
at kind of like, you know, maximizing uh
the possibility of like answering scientifically to those questions and
assessing policy impact. But it's always very difficult for
everyone, including for them. And it's obviously not
surprising that the lay citizen, you know, the
man in the street, the woman in the street
is not well equipped to anticipate um you know,
what will be the, the the macros social impact
of a policy, I mean to, to,
to infer to, to induce any sort of like
conclusion about whether a policy works or doesn't work.
You have to, you would have to ideally have
access to facts and outcomes that are distributed on the
on the territory, which is of course impossible to
do individually. Uh Most people are not professional scientists
, uh social scientists, sociologists, economists. Um
and, and even assuming that people have access to
relatively reliable policy information, which is already extremely hard
to do, you know, requires representative samples,
it requires the econometric method, etcetera, etcetera.
Even assuming that people have that information very often that
information that rigors, uh you know, opinion that
they may come up with about whether a given program
works or, or or doesn't work at, you
know, advancing a given political issue. People will
often not have the motivation to act on the,
on the, on the basis of that. So
for instance, I might know that it's, you
know, bad nowadays to eat meat and to take
the plane. And I might know very well reflectively
that I'm supposed to stop eating meat or at least
beef and take the plane less. Well, it's
pretty hard from a mot visional perspective to be completely
compelled to act in accordance with those principles. I
try, I try my best but very often,
you know, I'm experiencing a sort of like weakness
of will and I will fail to meet in practice
those sort of like more standards that I claim to
have and that I claim to follow. Mhm.
Uh Let me just ask you one more question before
we move on to another topic about this. And
this is perhaps something that I will also ask you
when it comes to other topics we're going to explore
here today. But when it comes to this particular
study, I mean, do you expect this to
apply to basically everyone, regardless of their, for
example, political ideology or partisanship or I mean,
is there any way, by which perhaps there are
some differences between, for example, left and right
liberals and conservatives or not? Um, it's a
, it's a big question. I wouldn't claim to
be able to answer this one. So I'm a
political psychologist but I don't really claim to be a
specialist of like, uh, you know, subgroup
differences or, or more, more differences across,
um, uh, yeah, across differences of partisanship
or, or more sensitivity. I would say that
a tendency to overvalue intentions with respect to causes that
you care about, you know, to, to
want to positively reward or, or, or thank
, you know, politicians or social actors who are
helping an issue versus wanting to punish those who are
selfish or who disregard the cause that you care about
that will tend to be universal, I think because
it's very likely to be part of our sort of
like universal, you know, social cognition package.
It's like cognitive skills that you need to engage all
the time every day and that you would have had
to engage, you know, ancestrally regularly over the
millennials to gauge the trustworthiness of potential co-operation partners.
So this you should expect will be so much universal
. Now, at the same time, of course
, there are differences are, you know, relevant
morally. And so it's possible that people who are
a bit like, you know, who have a
bit of a effective altruist sensitivity or who are maybe
a bit more libertarian or maybe a bit more on
the autistic spectrum or whatnot. It's possible that people
who have those personality characteristics who are a little less
, you know, um, elsewhere than in the
cognitive average of the population. It's possible that those
people may on average spontaneously or being or, or
maybe educated to value policy impact a bit more than
the good principles and the intentions that drive them,
that they may be a bit more psychologically compatible with
the principles of utilitarianism and pragmatism. Uh I think
there's some evidence doing that, but I don't claim
to be a, I don't claim to be a
specialist of that. And um and yeah, and
as regards the policy efficiency, I think, yeah
, most people will have difficulty, you know,
representing uh orders of magnitudes and, and, and
impacts and to gauge policy efficiency based on figures.
But of course, here again, there's a bit
of margin of leeway. If you, you know
, learn for many years that if you work for
many years at the Ministry of the Economy or whatnot
, you learn to many people and to handle figures
and to represent what they mean a bit more,
you have more of a sense of like, you
know what 10 million represents with respect to as compared
to 1 billion. And you are be able to
get a sense of like what is the budget of
the state? What is the budget of the company
and that puts you in a better position to reason
about figures. I think, I think even in
my conference since our French president, he is probably
much better at reasoning about figures when it comes to
economic. Although men than I myself, just because
he was the minister of the economy for many years
. And he's a professional doing that. And you
would hope that politicians are good at doing that.
And to be honest, I don't know what my
colleagues in political science who work on political elites are
finding, I hope that they are finding that they
had a decent numerical literacy, but I'm not completely
convinced. Yeah, le let's see, let's see
about that. So, OK, so in our
previous conversation, we talked a little bit about misinformation
and just to try to perhaps establish a bridge between
our two conversations here. Uh when it comes to
sharing partisan news on social media specifically. So you
mean you mean making partisan news of, of,
of, of news finds us sorry, like you
mean like sharing, sharing you selectively in a way
that is partisan? Yes, exactly. Exactly.
So do do strong moral convictions also play a role
there. And if so what are the consequences?
Um Yes, they do. They absolutely do.
So we have, we have that uh that paper
recently published in, in Pnes Nexus with um my
friends Sasha Altai and, and Brain Street Clan again
, in which we essentially show using you know,
relatively simple online experiments that the more people that,
that first of all people are, are, are
disposed to engage in what we call my side sharing
or partisan sharing. They report higher willingness to share
, you know, news items either true or false
that fit the ideology. You know, there are
congruent to their side that for instance, portray,
you know, um a social threat that they are
likely to believe in. Let's say I'm a democrat
, I'm gonna want to pass along and I'm gonna
be more likely to pass along the news that a
piece of news that says that, I don't know
, there's a big problem but like uh 3d printing
of guns because it's gonna cause, you know,
the spread of, of, of, of,
of like homemade guns in the US or whatnot.
So people tend to share news that are con to
their side uh plausible threats. Um Statistical facts that
they think are true. You know, for instance
, um you should take a bunch of like a
liberal participants. They are fairly likely to pass along
. Uh a news item that says that this,
for instance, you know, five or 10% gender
pay gap between men and women in the US,
which is roughly true, right? But they're also
pretty likely to want to share um a piece of
fake news that will say that there's a 60% pay
gap between men and women, which is false,
which is vastly exaggerated. Right. So, yeah
, news items, claims, uh rumors, true
or false when they fit people's uh prior expectations and
moral commitments, you know, uh political convictions,
um, activist motivations or whatnot uh will tend to
be passed along more in real life and social media
. The, the, the studies that are included
in the paper that I'm talking about are only on
social media, but we also know that that's the
case in, in real life. Um So,
yeah, people have the tendency that 10 is amplified
by uh the degree to which demoralize or that they
deem you know, certain issue to be of like
political priority for them. So whether, you know
, they see a political issue, gun control abortion
or, or the, or the ban on abortion
, for instance, for, for conservatives as being
like a core value for their moral identity, for
instance, or are being central to their moral identity
when people, you know, rate. Um I
mean, report that they highly more or less an
issue that amplifies identity to share uh new selectively.
Uh And we also find unsurprisingly that people who are
more extreme on an issue, even when they don't
moralize, it are more likely to uh to share
news related to that issue in ways that are,
that are partisan. So what does that mean?
Um It can mean a mix of several things.
Um The spontaneous interpretation would simply be to say that
, you know, the more people care about an
issue. They want, people want to tackle a
social problem. They want to, with the more
they want to advance or cause the, the more
they are to behave like little activists, like little
, you know, militant members of a tribe.
And they want to pass along, you know,
um claims information that they think will mobilize other people
to take action or that potentially can also um they
, they can also pass along those militant claims because
they expect that they will therefore be able to signal
, you know, a group memberships. I think
both motivations are taking place. I think both mechanisms
uh are driving part sharing to some extent. Um
But we admit that it's also unclear whether um people
are not also simply sharing uh you know, news
items in partition ways because they think that the message
that the, that the claim and caption, it
is more plausible. So there's a sort of like
there's a sort of like, you know, um
it's hard to tell to what extent partisan safety sharing
is carried forward by stronger prior beliefs or strong convictions
that the claim is true versus more motivated thinking or
more political or, or more motivations that, that
, that sort of like motivate people to act in
somewhat activist ways by signaling allegiances and by trying to
influence the the belief of others about those, those
um those social topics potentially to, to mobilize them
or to prompt them to act, that's a little
unclear. Uh And in that paper, we're not
in a position to, to tell what is the
relative contribution of the two mechanisms. And there's a
big debate right now in political behavior, political psychology
, political science about the extent to which um you
know, differences between partisans in behavior, in news
consumption, in judgments of accuracy of a given claim
in decisions to share news, et cetera. To
what extent those differences between partisans between political subgroups are
explained by, you know, political motivated thinking,
instrumental, instrumental motives as opposed to more, uh
you know, accuracy oriented, just differences in part
of beliefs. Uh It's a big, it's a
big debate right now. I can only recommend your
uh your viewers to check out the work of Ben
Tappin, which has done a lot of good work
with the Golden Penny Cook and David ran about that
. But they try to, to argue that much
, many instances of what seem to be partisan motivated
thinking might actually boil down to different in priors.
I think, I think the argument that they make
is pretty convincing. I still think that motivated thinking
is real. I still think that it's very real
. Um But it's clearly the case that a lot
in a lot of like survey contexts, a lot
of like social science context, what might be taken
at face value as evidence of motivated thinking might actually
boil down to just partisan disagreements in what is true
in the world and what is plausible piece of information
. You know. Now I think you asked me
, you, you, you asked me about the
consequences of moralizing the topic and, and the,
the impact of uh of that on, on,
on, on, on partisan sharing of, of
news items. So, yeah, as I said
, it amplifies your, your propensity to, to
effectively share news that fit your ideology. But in
the paper, we, we don't just describe uh
we don't just register that fact. We also try
to um test to what extent it is robust and
to what extent it can be kind of like influenced
or mitigated by interventions. And so when we manipulated
the the perceived um audience of the sharing, is
it the group? Is it the art group didn't
seem to have much of an effect? But I
can come back to that because we have another paper
in which the my machine works. Uh We in
the same paper with ASHA Alai and, and BR
Mle, we also manipulated whether the people are imagining
to share news from a anonymous personal account, didn't
have any effect on the the patterns of sharing,
still engaging in public but sharing. And towards the
end of the paper, we also tested an intervention
which in which we told participants that essentially they have
a confirmation bias and that, that may potentially bias
, you know, their new sharing decisions. And
the last experiment in which we tell them that they
also have a sharing bias that they have a propensity
to share more stuff that align with their, with
their ideology that tells them what they want to hear
. And neither of those, uh, two last
interventions really had much of an effect. I think
they tended to reduce a little bit overall showing but
small effect, very small effect. It didn't,
uh, reduce people's propensity to share news selectively.
It didn't make people more likely to share incongruent news
and less likely to share congruent news. Ok.
So what it would, what all that suggests,
I think is that selective sharing and its amplification by
moralization and actually extremity is very robust. It's something
that is deeply entrenched in people's cognitive uh dispositions and
that makes sense if um it's underpinned by more motivations
, we know that more motivations are trade off insensitive
, right? If you really care about defending abortion
, if you are, you know, a,
a convinced conservative, why would you, why would
you swayed in your moral in your political fight by
a small, you know, intervention, you know
, sort of experiments, of course, that's unlikely
to have much of an effect because, you know
, we are touching upon deeply entrenched, um you
know, identity relevant moral convictions. And if,
and to the extent that the part is sharing is
driven by sincere convictions about, you know, there
being a threat associated to a given issue or um
beliefs about the fact that the art group is really
evil and really stupid. Well, here again,
it's not a small intervention in a sort of experiment
that is gonna sway that belief that you have acquired
over the years, over, over, you know
, many repeated trials of like consuming partisan media and
conversations with people, etcetera, etcetera. So in
general, it's very hard to change uh people's news
diets, uh intuitive reactions to political messages simply because
they have a long biographical history and they are deeply
entrenched either in people's expectations about the world or their
political commitments and that's hard to modify and surprisingly.
Mhm. So it's, it seems to me that
it's difficult, at least as far as we know
to curb this tendency that most people have to share
strongly partisan news, including sometimes fake news. Right
. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um it is
generally difficult. Um some people like uh Sasha Altai
and Hugo Messi would even argue that, you know
, should we be spending that much uh of our
work and our, you know, money on trying
to come up with like interventions and get misinformation.
Um The spread of misinformation is to begin with not
that big of a problem. At least in the
West, people don't consume that much uh fake news
. You know, most of the fake news are
shared by a tiny little majority of Twitter users and
Facebook and Facebook users does the work for instance of
uh you know, um Matias Osmundsen and Michael Ben
Pearson and others, you know, who have a
American Political Science review that shows that most of the
spreaders of part fake news are actually less than 1%
of the Twitter sample that they could get access to
. And that, that less than 1% is showing
90% of the fake news or something like that.
So it's on the whole, in addition to the
fact that few fake news are being shared in the
, in the sample. Ok. So there's few
, there's little circulation of misinformation overall, you know
, a lot of studies and that that's what they
find. And a very small minority of like pretty
cynical activists seem to be doing the heavy lifting of
sharing that information. So maybe we're exaggerating the seriousness
of misinformation. It doesn't mean that it's not a
problem at all. It is for sure a problem
. It is a problem that, for instance,
you know, people increasingly uh in some areas of
the world are dispersed full of vaccines. It is
a problem that the Russians are spreading, you know
, anti-french propaganda uh in Africa and taking advantage of
that, of those misinformation campaigns to send their Wagner
soldiers and to increase their influence in West Africa.
That's of course a problem. But as far as
like the circulation of misinformation on social media about politics
in the West is concerned is possible that we're exaggerating
a little bit. Uh the seriousness of the problem
. And so what, what people like Sasha Alta
and Yuma would say, and I'm, and I'm
sure they're, they're right if they thought about it
more than I have, what we should instead say
is to try to focus our efforts and our time
and our money on making people care more about trusting
uh reliable sources. OK. Like increasing people's trust
in uh the Washington Post, the New York Times
, Le Monde le Figaro, uh El Pais and
whatnot. OK. So the priority should not be
in trying to fight misinformation. It's hard. It
may, it may even backfire by reinforcing conspiracy theories
and whatnot. The priority should be to try to
restore a little bit trust in institutions and trust in
journalism. And if we, and if we manage
to increase a little bit people's trust in a legitimate
legacy news media, if we manage to make them
consume a bit more reliable information, we would diminish
the amount of false beliefs and misinformation in society much
more than we would if we manage to make people
a bit more distrustful of uh you know, fake
news sources and whatnot. At least that's the argument
that they defend. So I don't know if it
answers a bit what you were saying, but that's
my uh interpretation of uh I mean, what would
be said, what would have to be said here
? Mhm. Yeah. And actually I have uh
seal t on the show two or three years ago
and when it comes to the seriousness of the sharing
of fake news online in social media, particularly,
uh if I remember correctly said basically the same you
said there. And I, I think that uh
you were focusing mostly on people who share fake news
there. But uh it also applies to people who
actually produce fake news and put, put it into
circulation on the internet. It's just a tiny,
tiny, tiny minority of people doing that. Right
. Yeah, I imagine so. I haven't,
I haven't worked on like, you know, the
, the famous producers, like the websites who,
uh, you know, who output fake news online
, of course, they're pursuing, you know,
clicks and, and attention and revenue when they're here
for the, for the money, for the most
part, they might also have, you know,
disruptive motivations, like more political motivations to undermine trust
in the establishment or in journalism or in, you
know, the current politicians or whatnot. Um,
I, I don't know, I don't know what
I mean here again, I think, you know
, the, the, the, the, the
, the proportion of information producers who are intentionally cynical
, intentionally spreading misinformation is extremely small. Uh Of
course, it's absolutely problematic that they exist and there
should be, you know, uh probably penal sanctions
against them and, you know, the, the
government should crack down on them at Zara, but
it's easy to overestimate the gravity of the issue simply
because, you know, um the mind is extremely
uh uh you know, hyper sensitive to, to
threat in general. So that's true of like citizens
. That's true of journalists, that's true of politicians
or researchers. So any information that somehow contributes to
saying that there is something that is not working well
in society will be a bit more, you know
, believed a bit more uh culturally successful uh holding
constant other factors. Of course, I'm not saying
that you can make people believe, you know,
anything and everything, people aren't completely good. But
if the threat seems plausible and if it seems relevant
, uh it's gonna spread far and wide. And
so there's a tendency for the broad public and,
and, and, and, and sentence themselves to
, to think that it, to think that the
, the problem of misinformation is very broad is very
big and they indicate can potentially also have, you
know, a career incentives, publication incentives to also
further exa exaggerate the threat. So I think we
have to keep that in mind. Yeah, like
the mind is super attentive to threat, we easily
exaggerate things. It's relevant, right? Makes us
sound interesting in the conversation and it creates opportunities for
publication for talks for uh you know, a commission
that the parliament or what not. And um and
that will, that will make sense. I mean
, I'm not necessarily, you know, throwing stones
at people who participate in that I have perhaps participated
in that kind of like more panic about misinformation myself
intentionally or not. But we should keep in mind
that. Yeah, the, the, the problem
is probably not as serious as the climate changes or
the, the war in uh in Israel is.
Mhm. So, in a related topic, uh
in our previous conversation, we've also talked a little
bit about conspiracy theories. And in this time,
I would like to ask you about specifically when it
comes to political conspiracy theories and other kinds of rebased
narratives. Are there social functions to holding and disseminating
them? Yeah, presumably at least that's what we
argue with uh Mika Pearson and, and others,
but Mikel Bang, in particular, in, in
at least a couple of pieces that we have written
together. Um So again, the mind is very
, is very susceptible to threatening information, right?
Uh We are a loss of earth. It makes
sense to, you know, um get ourselves ready
for, for threatening a threat. So it's obviously
adaptive to overreact to information that there may be a
social threat um in particular social threats that, you
know, take a group based form, right?
Because uh we humans evolved in an essential environment in
which presumably there was a fair amount of group competition
and group conflict. Um And so it's, it's
adaptive to overreact to be kind of like on the
on the lookout for potential or coordinate social threats directed
against us, directed against our in group are keen
and Sarah and once people have that predisposition to find
, you know, threat based narratives, appealing like
conspiracy theories, um potentially also some popular forms of
like uh Marxism, anti racist discourse, anti-communist discourse
, et cetera, much of ideologies, threat based
narratives, right? I mean, whether you're trying
to, you know, um motivate people to um
take action against communism or whether you're trying to motivate
your population to take actions against the capitalist imperialism and
to endorse communism In all those cases, you're going
to try to spin threat based narratives and to,
you know, uh diffuse them in society through the
journals of propaganda through the channels of general education,
through the, the radio, et cetera. So
threat based narratives are absolutely central in politics and in
, in, in, in ideological phenomena. And
so once you have that ubiquitous with based narratives uh
that, you know, uh the mind responds to
and finds intuitive attention grabbing and uh well pay attention
to it becomes possible to use them instrumentally strategically to
influence how people think of yourself and, and,
and, and, and act. So if I
, if I had a good, you know,
threat based narrative that can get my group to team
up together and to attack or defend against an enemy
group, if I can somehow convince that, you
know, there's a dangerous art group right there in
the neighboring um behind the neighboring hill or in the
neighboring nation that is poi poised to attack us and
who wants to exterminate us. I will easily be
able to reap the benefits of like mobilizing my group
against that art group. OK. So they are
mobilizing benefits in, in using instrumentally threads narratives.
And we suspect that at least sometimes that's how PC
theories are being used. Uh People use them to
kind of like recruit um new individuals to join a
political fight, a political cause that they care about
. For instance, you know, anti-establishment uh uh
narrative or, or some kind of like a more
racist narrative against uh you know, the neighboring tribe
that you, that you may be living close to
in like the Middle East or in Africa or whatnot
. And so, and so, yeah, it
becomes possible to, to kind of like instrumentally agitate
a sense of threat in other people to mobilize them
to side with you and to take action with you
on your side and to potentially uh yeah, organize
collectively to, to, to thwart a potential threat
. Um And, and there's at least another potential
um social use that can be made of uh of
this narrative that is also very instrumental that it is
also a little exploitative, which is a signaling,
of course, you know, by, by saying
how much you hate an art group, by saying
how much you think that the art group is uh
dangerous, uh you know, uh conspiring against you
with Zara. Zara, you can express a sense
of loyalty to your own group, you can,
you can by, by see who you hated society
, you're potentially sort of like, you know,
distinguishing yourself from a food that in group and also
potentially neutral audiences who don't care about it and you're
singling you, you're signing. So you're expressing who
you're sending with. And that can be uh that
can be useful to um that can be useful to
uh to, to express to potential allies to potential
recruits, you know, that you're standing with them
, that you care about the interests itself. Um
As you mentioned, one important thing about the mobilization
argument, which is that this, there's kind of
a debate in the country, sciences, of culture
and political science and what not about the extent to
which those um threat based narratives really persuade people or
really motivate people to act so on, on a
sort of like optimistic accounts when you spread, you
know, threat based rumor or conspiracy theory that seems
to be believable or, you know, a cons
spiritual narrative or like a sort of like um ethnic
rumor about the fact that, you know, the
neighboring Tutsi are gonna want to massacre all your uh
um Hutu fellows or whatnot under an optimistic argument,
uh an optimistic view of the argument, those claims
will persuade and will really get people to act because
they're afraid of threat, which we really have motivational
impact. I think sometimes it's the case. Um
but people like Michael B, Peterson and maybe also
Hugo Mercier have argued and I'm pretty convinced by that
, by that argument that very often people are not
so much convinced, you know, prompted to act
and to take arms against the threat as they are
more using the information as a way of like signaling
that they are willing to attack, that they're ready
to attack already. And they're using the propaganda,
the threat based rumor, the narrative as a way
of like saying, hey, I'm one of those
guys who hate the other group. I'm willing to
take action. And I'm saying that to you in
order to signal that I'm ready to coordinate with you
in a potential collective action that we might want to
take against the other group. OK. So under
a sort of like strong form of the claim,
the negative information really persuades people to act under,
under a broader exception of the, of the argument
or, or the thesis, it doesn't really prompt
people to act, but it helps people who are
already motivated to act for other reasons, to organize
collectivity, to coordinate and to prepare a collective action
that may potentially, you know, target the other
group. Yeah. Uh And if that second um
interpretation of it is the correct one. Could it
, could it be that in this case uh conspiracy
, a political conspiracy theory or any other sort of
threat based narrative could function more as a sort of
justification to act than really uh as motivating people to
act upon it. Yeah. Yeah, exactly.
Um It could, it could serve, it could
allow individuals to rationalize an already existing motivation to,
you know, organize collective action and to attack or
to defend against the art group. Um Stereotypes,
you know, are not necessarily always super, super
believable. Uh Conspiracy theories are not always super super
believable, but just the fact that they are superficially
plausible or that they um can be at least,
you know, superficially endorsed by your allies may suffice
for them to function as like postdoc rationalizations of an
already existing disposition to hate the art group and to
want to attack against the other group. Yes.
Yes. And, and by, by, by
, by, by, by expressing endorsement of the
conspiracy theory or the, the, the ethnic rumor
or whatnot, but just saying that you believe it
or by disseminating it on yourself, you also signal
that you're one of those individuals who want to act
. So there's also a signaling value, at least
it contributes to co-ordination of collective action. So it
signals a membership, it gets you closer to a
coordinate action that is meaningful in terms of collective action
that may be hostile to the art group. And
you're right, it can also uh rationalize under under
the existing motivation to, to take action. Uh
And uh I mean, just before we move to
, we move to another topic, uh you mentioned
there, the fact that it's still debatable to what
extent conspiracy theories might have actual behavioral effects. I
mean, in terms of mobilizing people to do something
uh that also apply. I mean, this is
an ongoing debate also that applies to things like the
spread of misinformation, political ads during campaigns, online
, et cetera. Right? I mean, we're
still not sure to what extent stuff like that,
particularly on social media and the internet more generally really
translating to actual offline behavior. Right. Yeah,
and, and offline behavior as well. Um I
mean, here I can be, I can be
, again, the echo of, you know,
the work of Hugo me here for a second because
I think it's very uh it's very convincing even if
I sometimes think that Hugo is going a tad too
far and his optimism about human rationality. But I
think the, the general arguments are pretty, pretty
strong, pretty valid. People are not easily gullible
, they are not easily um fooled, they have
intuitive capacities to gauge the coherence and consistency of new
information with what they already believe. And they're pretty
good at gauging whether sources of information and messages have
their interests at heart or are trying to deceive them
and whatnot. So that's what he calls, you
know, epistemic vigilance or in a in a more
novel formulation, open open visions. So I think
that's very true. Of course, um you won't
easily um you know, make Germans become anti Semitic
if there's not an already pretty strong pre-existing disposition for
anti-semitism in German culture that is, you know,
plunging in roots um, in, you know,
several centuries of, of, of, uh Catholic
uh and, and partisan history, you won't easily
get people to buy products that they absolutely don't need
. You won't create helo um, new desires.
Uh That's, I think actually, by the way
, if you, if you allow me to,
um hit a little bit on the standard of social
scientists who are not cognitive and who are not evolutionary
, I think that's often like a sort of like
a misconception that a lot of people in traditional sociology
or whatnot may have is that they think that capitalism
advertisement propaganda, um it's have the capacity to generate
non practicing desires. I think that there, that's
, that's generally misconception, human nature is about the
same for everybody and it's pretty deeply structured by a
transaction pressures. You won't easily persuade people to desire
commodities or activities that they are not evolution be predisposed
to like. Right. So in general, what
advertisement does is that it will exploit and obey the
existing predisposition for, I don't know, um junk
food, you know, fat stuff, sugary stuff
. It will explode to pre uh predi predisposition to
, you know, want to have sex and to
um want to see, you know, attractive sexual
partners, et Zara and he's going to present products
or services that tap those pre-existing desires. Uh And
, and if it manages to sell more new services
, new goods. It's because it's making products that
type, that tap those already existing desires, more
salient, more visible it for them, but it's
not creating desires from nothing. Ethnic yellow at all
, I think. Mhm. Uh, yeah.
I don't know if it's, if it's answering your
, your question in any way. No, no
. Maybe, maybe a little, if you,
maybe a little element that I think I should add
about like the, the the potency of like propaganda
and, and, and rumors and you know,
like kind of like discourses that aim to persuade and
to mobilize people. Um An argument that Hugo would
make in this case and that I'm increasingly convinced by
is that um very often when people say that the
endorsement theories or that they endorse, you know,
ideologies like Marxism or like a, a pretty radical
ideology very often what is likely to be happening in
their heads is that people claim to be endorsing the
, the, the statement of the belief they ascend
to it. They say that they believe it,
but in fact, deep down in their and conscious
other systems are, are like uh not really,
you know, like they're not really taking the information
super seriously to the extent of motivating costly action,
costly action, big efforts on the part of the
individual. So very often people will say that they
endorse fashionable beliefs because they allow them to, you
know, seem informed, to seem like they care
about certain values that other people care about. Um
, they're gonna endorse them to, um, to
seem like, yeah, trustworthy, competent to seem
like they care about politics, etcetera. But in
fact, they very rarely will deviate from their,
you know, personal comfort or like, you know
, everyday ways of doing things and, you know
, private little self interest. Um, on the
basis of those belies very often, the, the
, the epistemic visions mechanisms are, it's not that
they are like turning down the information on the endorsement
of the narrative, but it's more like they are
keeping it in a sort of like isolated co format
which, you know, me be would call reflective
without really trying to connect them with like costly actions
that would potentially entail sacrifices for the individuals. And
uh and also big efforts in terms of like mobilizing
others and really, you know, like spending money
and time on like uh political calls that people claim
to care about. But in fact, don't really
do much to it in general. And, and
by the way, I'm completely, I'm completely guilty
of the same problem myself. OK? Like I'm
giving a bit of money every month to uh to
give well, and I'm trying to do a few
, like not so costly altruistic stuff. Uh But
I really take costly action in favor of more values
that, that, that I claim that I claim
to care about. Uh I claim to care about
the environment, but I'm still playing way too much
and still eating a bit, a bit too much
chicken. And so I'm, I'm completely guilty of
the same mechanism that I'm describing here. Uh But
so I, if that's true, then in this
particular case, uh people manifesting certain specific beliefs would
, would serve mainly a social signaling function, right
? In terms of signaling, their, I guess
, group affiliations, yeah, signaling. Um So
I think, you know, what's happening very often
is that we have mechanisms in the mind that are
, that evolve for tax benefits that were essentially relevant
, you know, getting your coalition to co-operate together
to solve a problem or throw out an enemy to
signal your trustworthiness to be kept and admitted as a
group as a good group member and whatnot and those
motivations. So those many divisions would have expressed themselves
with like intensity in the past when there was like
, like a lot of fitness interdependence. And when
there was like a lot of like external threat on
the group or whatnot, there are people would have
, you know, spent a lot of energy to
um get their group to team up together, or
they would have spent a lot of energy to signal
their devotion to the group by incurring pretty costly sacrifices
to deserve their place in the group at Zara because
back at the time, the environment was very threatening
. But nowadays, typically, most of us would
live in you know, relatively peaceful western societies in
which there is no war, there is no famine
, there are no uh natural catastrophes and whatnot.
And so we are not in dire need to mobilize
other people in collective action or we do, we
are not as much in dire need to signal group
memberships as, as we, as we used to
potentially. And so we're gonna, we're gonna still
have those mechanisms opening in our, in the background
of our heads. We're still gonna be doing a
little bit of, of like political and, and
more signaling but not with the same intensity, not
at the price of like as costly actions as maybe
we would have in intra context in, in context
of like group conflict or in or with as much
intensity as we would in like contemporary context that are
prone to war or where, you know, people
are a bit more in danger. So I would
say that the motivations are there uh But they are
only operating in a sort of like weak diminished form
in people's heads. But still, it's enough that
they're operating in a sort of like, you know
, uh minimal mode for the, for the belief
that people, for people to endorse beliefs and to
disseminate claims in ways that, you know, seem
to, yeah, that, that seem that still
seem to fulfill signaling functions and, and potentially uh
mobilization functions. So changing topics, you have a
paper where you explore the ways by which strongly motivate
people that are strongly morally motivated or committed to gender
equality in this specific case process and understand evidence regarding
gender bias hiring processes. So, uh and the
and of course, there are benefits to being committed
to gender equality in this specific case. But in
the paper, you also talk about potential costs.
Could you explain what's going on here? Yeah,
it's all very simple. So we have that uh
we have that pre print paper that uh got rejected
from many places, but I hope it will one
day be accepted by a decent social psychology journal uh
with um co authors um uh Hu Ling Xiao,
who's a, who's a Chinese colleague and Andre Mle
, my former PH advisor in which we look at
like how people consume um simplified scientific accounts, uh
simplified, you know, research summaries about the topic
of gender bias in hiring in organizations and doctor in
stem. And we look at how the degree of
like feminism, if you will the de the degree
to which they moralize gender equality influences those evaluations,
the degree to which they think those scientific uh reports
are credible, the methods are rigorous, you know
, the the findings are convincing sr itself. And
so there's, there's a, there's a, there's
a PNS paper that came out in 2015, I
think by Henry at a that showed that essentially when
people were presented with uh scientific demonstrations using, you
know, randomized control trials or like rigorous experimental methods
. When people were exposed to those uh proofs that
um having processes in academia favor uh men over women
with equal credentials, they found that men were less
receptive to that uh type of scientific result that women
were more likely to believe them and to want to
take action against, against those uh against those findings
. OK. So they found that there was some
kind of like a sex difference in how receptive or
how um how truthful people were at that demonstration.
And so here, what we tried to do was
to was to see first is that sex effect,
video, sex effect or is it more like an
moral ideology effect that is associated or co varying with
the sex difference? Is it possible that the sex
difference is in fact reducible to differences in moral commitments
in the degree to which people care about sex equality
um in our, in our, you know,
uh population of participants. And yes, it seems
to be the, it seems to be the case
when we control for more commitment very often the sex
effect disappears. And when we add more commitment as
a covariance of people, the variations of the degree
to which they trust the science they think is believable
. Um We find that the more people care about
more equality, the more they will trust, the
more they will deem plausible uh convincing those scientific reports
that demonstrate experimentally that uh women are being discriminated against
in having processes in academia. So that's, that's
a bright side. Ok. So we, we
, we, we expand already existing study. We
showed that what seemed to be a sex effect is
actually maybe more like a moral ideology effect. And
we find that good news, people who care more
about equality will uh welcome more with more receptivity,
those rigorous demonstrations that we may not be discriminated against
. However, on the flip side, we also
find that people who are more uh more committed to
equality, uh see as more persuading, as more
persuasive, sorry. Um more bogus demonstrations or conclusions
that there is gender bias in having taking place.
So here, what we did is that we substituted
the rigorous uh experimental demonstration of gender bias in hiring
with a more observational and fishy study that essentially looks
at the pre hiring um proportion of men and women
in stem and the post hiring proportions. And that
finds that in fact, the post hiring proportions of
women is greater than the pre hiring proportions. So
clearly, there's no gender bias in having against women
. And and, and we, and we visualize
that graphically with like pretty clear about shots and like
there's no ambiguity about the fact that women are really
favored in having process. And yet the research Army
concludes that the fact that women on the whole,
even after hiring are still a minority because they,
they are a minority before and after hiring, the
fact that women are a minority in science in the
scientific labs is a rigorous demonstration of the fact that
, you know, there's gender bias in hiring.
So that's a fac conclusion because people infer from the
fact that women are less generous, the notion that
there should be inevitably uh you know, gender-based in
having against them, even when the presented data is
clearly showing that women all things equal, actually favored
in the recruiting recruitment process. OK. And so
here we find that people um generally tend to do
not process the contribution between the result and the conclusion
and the higher and more commitment to the equality,
the more people are likely to rate that bogus scientific
conclusion as being, you know, convincing. OK
. So overall, in summary, if you care
, it seems that if you care more about gender
equality, if you're more of a feminist, you
will. And that's a and that's a good thing
rate more positively believe more rigorous demonstration of their being
uh gender bias against women. But you will also
be more receptive and more believing of bogus demonstrations that
only rely on observational evidence and that are even,
you know, showing results that are contradictory with the
conclusion. So this of course, does not,
you know, amount to uh saying that we should
stop being uh caring about gender equality. We should
, of course uh uh keep caring about that sort
of like moral and political targets, a very important
one. But the lesson that we are trying to
teach here and we're not the first ones to be
making that argument is that um when you are very
committed to a cause, it can potentially blend you
a little bit, you know, to the details
of a reasoning, it can make you a bit
more susceptible to confirmation bias or um or belief bias
in the sense that if you really endorse a conclusion
, if you think that the conclusion is true,
if you think that the conclusion is more desirable,
it makes you a bit more likely to neglect the
inferential steps or the reasoning that back it up and
that lead to it. And that's what we're trying
to show essentially, you know, morality binds and
blinds. As Jonathan, he would say it,
it can make people a bit more irrational uh at
the margins, even even if you know, the
aggregate social effects are on average positive, at least
sometimes it's gonna bias people's reasoning and we want to
show that. Mhm. So when it comes to
these ideological commitments that some people have, uh you've
also been working on ideological orthodoxy and specifically on the
repression of free speech. So what do we know
about what might motivate and what might be the goals
that a strong political activists try to pursue when repressing
free speech? OK. So here you're referring to
my work with uh Mika Van Heeren um recent work
, you know, just published or still in the
pipes at Sara. So not much is is out
yet. We have um we have a we have
a commentary article on, on David Pino and our
uh the alliance theory of ideology that, that our
commentary is called speech prepress and outrage from orthodox activists
as attempts at fascinating mobilizations and getting service among allies
. I'm sorry, the title is a little long
but you know, your, your viewers are welcome
to check it out. And we have also like
a longer piece in preparation that is currently called the
Ky Foundations of Orthodoxy in which we try to expand
a bit those arguments in a somewhat more detailed form
. So, yeah, Michael and I have taken
the phenomenon of like political dogmatism and speech repression as
our sort of like object of inquiry. Recently,
we've become interested in that um for various reasons.
Uh One because we think that, you know,
there's a bit too much repression of speech in the
world uh nowadays still obviously also because um we think
that there's a bit too much of it in uh
in, in the west, in, in the
US, in particular, there's a somewhat, you
know, concerning phenomenon of cancel culture that is threatening
uh universities and intellectual professions that we think is pretty
problematic. And of course, because, you know
, speech is still massively repressed in authoritarian countries uh
the world over and we, and we told,
we told ourselves that, well, it seems like
there's not really a, a mature cognitive and evolutionary
theory of like, why people are orthodox or we
press free speech in ideological movements, you know,
be they moral movements, religious movements, political movements
and whatnot. And so we, we told ourselves
, well, let's try to develop a theory of
like why there is, you know, the anti-communist
witch hunt in the fifties. Why is there,
uh you know, the repression and the surveillance of
political dissent in China right now? Why did the
Catholic church, you know, persecute the heretics in
the middle ages and why is there a cancel culture
in the US right now? Both on the left
and on the right. So that's a bit explanatory
target if I, if I may say and so
what we say is essentially pretty similar to, you
know, what we've been saying about the conspiracy theories
and what, you know, people like cosine and
tube and, and, and other authors have been
saying about, you know, um more beliefs and
political beliefs, essentially, we are proposing that people
re speech for two main reasons. Uh Mobilization goals
and signaling goals. So the mobilization goal would be
fulfilled in the following way. If you care a
lot about the issue, uh you will want to
, you know, uh rally your life and to
motivate your life to, you know, create a
coalition, create, create a sort of like group
uh behind yourself with yourself to tackle the threat,
right? You might want to vanquish uh racism in
the US. For instance, you might want to
, um, you know, um thwart the threat
of communist infiltration in the US in the 19 fifties
if you're like a, like a ma artist or
what not. And so there's a sort of like
intrinsic desire or need to organize collective action if you
want to advance a cult or if you want to
defeat an enemy, be it also like an intellectual
enemy, it doesn't have to be a human out
group. It can be like dangerous ideas that you
think are exerting, you know, a corruptive influence
on your society or whatnot. And so in those
conditions, that goal of mobilization becomes to try to
influence people's beliefs so that they believe that uh the
mobilization is, is justified, is necessary. And
typically, one way of doing that is to tell
people that there's a threat because if there's a threat
, you know, it's gonna activate our evolved sense
of like threat, avoidance. It's very powerful from
a motivational perspective. And so often you can motivate
people to gang together behind you to organize for your
side if you can convince them that they are facing
a threat. And in that context, what we're
saying is that people activists, political leaders, ideological
entrepreneurs, et cetera, et cetera, they will
try to, they will tend to try to regulate
free speech and to maybe repress free speech when they
think that the speech in question is potentially demobilizing when
, when they think that potentially the information is contrarian
or is kind of like calling into question the legitimacy
of the fight or it contributes to nuance or procession
of the threat or contributes to uh say that the
threat is not that bad after all or what not
, you know what I mean? So like uh
if I take the example of, you know,
the the canceling of controversial speakers on us campuses uh
recently by the left, but also by the right
, if you're a staunch anti racist, you may
want to deplatform or to cancel the invitation or to
stop um the, the, the talk from taking
place of a biologist who's doing research on, let's
say the link between genetics and, and, and
personality or someone who's investigating potential, you know,
psychological differences or IQ differences between populations and whatnot because
rightfully or wrongfully, I don't know, it's,
it's an open question. You might think that those
pieces of information in, if it's sif research,
those pieces of information may contribute to normalize, to
justify uh racism, not necessarily directly but even indirectly
as you know, making like uh maybe a biological
conception of human nature a bit more popular or a
bit more plausible and whatnot. So you might,
you might be motivated to be press speech that you
think is contrarian or susceptible to undermine uh the third
need for the necessity of the mobilization against racism.
And in particular, you will try to repress speech
that you think is undermining people's perception of threat,
right? For instance, you know, research also
that may downplay the notion that there is a link
between, you know, um the race of the
defendant and police violence, for instance, will typically
be seen as being contrarian as being dangerous by anti
racist activists because they fear that its dissemination in society
may influence people's prior beliefs towards them. Believing that
the, the the the problem of racism is not
that bad or that, you know, it's it's
exaggerated or whatnot and that may have demobilizing effects and
the same like on the right people may want to
repress free speech of um the free expression of,
for instance, you know, um critical race theory
or, you know, uh the notion that,
you know, gender roles are at least partly socially
constructed because they feel like dissemination of those contracting messages
may kind of like diminish or undermine the the enthusiasm
that people have for traditional Christian values, et cetera
. And they see that as a threat. Ok
. So one core function we think of speech repression
and speech regulation is you try to control people's beliefs
by intervening on information flows so that people stay motivated
for causes that you think will bring about shared benefits
in particular against, you know, social threats.
And of course, once there are those efforts to
mobilize allies for causes and against enemies that creates individual
incentives for people to signal devotion to certain causes to
those causes and to the group. So once people
care vastly about anti-racism, once people have a moral
panic about communist influence in the US, in the
, in the fifties, once conservative America is going
through a more panic about critical race theory being taught
at university or at high school that creates individual opportunities
for repetition and enhancement. Uh It creates incentives for
individuals to seem like they're gonna be um very tough
with uh you know, uh control on ideas with
like ideas that they are in group, dislike as
a way of showing their degree of commitment for those
ideas. Um sorry for the group. Uh and
, and, and for the causes that they are
trying to advance, like, if I'm, let's
say a po position in 19 fifties like Maar and
there it is and is a sort of like more
panic against uh about the influence of communism in American
culture and institutions. Well, I may see it
as an opportunity to try to erect, to emerge
myself as a tough politician, as a reliable politician
who will defend, you know, the traditional values
of corporate liberal America against the threat of communism.
And so he quits um by repressing speech um of
people who are suspected of Soviet sympathies. Someone like
Mac mccalley can emerge as someone who's committed to protect
regional America against the threat. And so, yeah
, you, you, you know, you appear
tough against the contractions, you appear tough against the
enemies against people who disagree with you. And that
can potentially allow you to score reputational points. Ok
. So, uh, uh, yeah, II
, I have one more question or topic to explore
about political activists but, uh, still on the
topic of repressing free speech. I mean, I've
asked you a similar kind of question when earlier we
talked about uh spreading uh fake news and all of
that and uh how basically uh people care more about
or a apparently care more about the values and symbols
driving political decisions than uh the concrete effects they have
on society. Uh I mean, in this particular
case, are you also interested in trying to understand
perhaps if there would be any ways we could try
to curb the repression of free speech or is that
not something that you are really studying? Uh I
mean, I'm obviously interested in that question because,
you know, the, the, the very fact
that, that I think that there's a need for
a g theory of free speech. Um Is it
still a reflection of the fact that I think that
, you know, the repression of free speech is
at least sometimes bad even if sometimes it's also desirable
. Um I think it's a good thing that for
instance, in Europe, we're trying to, you
know, fight uh neo Nazi propaganda by making it
illegal to have a swat seekers and uh and to
, and to sing a neo Nazi chants in the
streets. Um So there are cases where, I
mean, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not
a free speech. Absolutely alone. Even if I'm
very pro free speech, what can we do to
reinforce or to strengthen free speech? Um I don't
know, Ricardo, I don't really know. I
haven't really studied that, uh that question yet.
Um I guess, I guess, I guess decreasing
the level of like polarization of society and trying to
make our national societies a little less conflictual will help
because um as we argue in our work with Michael
, um it seems pretty clear that motivations, we
press free speech co vary and are sort of like
upregulated, increased by perceptions of society, be conflict
ridden, you know. Mhm. When you think
that there's a dangerous out group that is threatening your
in group, which is like a, like a
, like a by definition, your perception of conflict
, um you will feel an increased need to um
motivate my group to form like a cohesive coalition or
to, you know, rally new life to,
to, to fight that threat. And um and
it's to that extent that people is to the extent
that people feel that they have benefits in mobilizing,
that they will feel that they also have benefits in
repressing speech that they think could be demobilizing, right
? So the more society is harmonious uh and the
more, you know, the different subgroups that compose
society can live their lives fairly freely. And the
more uh the, the less inequality maybe there is
and the less effective polarization there is, the less
it should be a problem. Um The, the
, the less you should have motivations from activists on
, on either side to want to be press and
to police the speech of others because yeah, again
, like um motivation to repress speech are impossible to
dissociate from threat, perceptions and motivations to, to
motivate your own group to do stuff in the world
and often what motivates. Um Yeah, that,
that, that mobilization effort is perception of threat.
So I would say that, yeah, you have
to make societies a bit more peaceful and a little
less polarized as for more. So that's of course
, very difficult, right? Uh It's a sort
of like, you know, um basic fundamental uh
program for policymakers and uh you know, it involves
, you know, maybe uh changing a bit the
economy, it involves changing. Uh maybe the way
the the news media are functioning to make them a
little less uh to make them uh to make them
a little less polarizing, a little less partisan.
It calls for a number of reforms in many,
many different sectors of society. Uh I'm not here
to make, you know, specific policy recommendations.
That's something that I hope to maybe think a bit
more about in the future Michael, uh, might
have recommendations to that effect. I think he's giving
a talk about the future of free speech in,
um, in Sweden, uh, early December.
That may be of interest to some of your viewers
. Uh, well, it will probably be too
late by the time your podcast is out. But
, yeah, a lot of people who are more
or less influential, are interested in how to foor
free speech. Uh, I think, um Jacob
, um what is his name? Uh Meena who
wrote like a History of Free Speech, um probably
also has pretty interesting positive recommendations about that. He's
got a very interesting book called um Free Speech or
History from Socrates to uh to I forget what that
is really good and that I can recommend your viewers
to, to check out. Uh But yeah,
I'm not, I'm not gonna venture into like specific
, you know, policy recommendations in terms of like
what to do to enforce free speech. Um I
don't really know but, but for sure that value
needs to be protected and uh and it's a cardinal
value of, of us um scientists and I assume
, you know, most regional liberals of, of
, of, of, of the West right now
? Great. So, uh would you like to
tell people just before we go the kinds of work
you're doing on right now, what kinds of topics
you're working on? And, and by the way
, I didn't mention this at the beginning in our
in, in the introduction. But in the near
future, you will also be moving to one stick
to Jean Nico. Yeah, that's it. Yeah
. Yeah. Yeah. So my, my contract
at university is reaching its end in um end of
March 24 and I have a new job at the
Envision Nico in Paris. Uh I'll be part of
the um evolution and the social team. So evolution
and social cognition and my P I is going to
be Olivia Mohan, who's a cultural evolutionist, who's
mostly been uh been doing work on like uh the
cult evolution of uh of, of uh scriptural systems
of languages. But he's interested in cultural conservatism.
Why do people want to prefer the status quo in
many cases with respect to like, you know,
preserving uh cultural traditions, preferring um the status quo
in, in between group relationships in politics, etcetera
. And so, yeah, we're going to try
to explore like what, what motivations people may have
in, in, in, in preferring the status
quo. And so I'll be back in various and
working from France, studying from uh yeah, the
spring 24 and as, as well as my current
work. Well, I would say that many of
the papers that have been talk uh that I've been
talking about today are not necessarily published yet. Uh
So I'm still like working on them a little bit
. Uh And in particular, what occupies most of
my time right now is our work with Michael Mikel
Bang um about orthodoxy and speech repression. I'm trying
to write a relatively long theory piece about, about
that and the social functions of mobilizations and, and
, and signaling that we think it fulfills. Um
And so that's my main piece of work right now
. Yes. Uh And by the way, where
can people find you on the internet? Uh They
can find me on Twitter. Uh Of course,
my handle is um a capital A uh underscore Marie
um Ma Rie underscore S CIA Marie. I like
science and also have a website that I need to
um that maybe you, you would be able to
uh to cite another video, I guess in some
websites. Um What I and you can shoot me
an email at Antoine dot Marie dot sc I at
gmail.com if they also want to. Of course,
and I'm on Facebook and you know, find the
ball through many channels. Great. So look Antoine
. Thank you so much for coming on the show
again, as I said at the beginning of the
show, it was great. Fun to talk to
you. Thanks a lot. Have a good day
. See you. Hi guys. Thank you for
watching this interview. Until the end. If you
liked it, please share it. Leave a like
and hit the subscription button. The show is brought
to you by the N Lights learning and development.
Then differently check the website at N lights.com and also
please consider supporting the show on Patreon or paypal.
I would also like to give a huge thank you
to my main patrons and Paypal supporters, Perera Larson
, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno, Bernard Seche O
of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitten Bear. No
wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip Forrest
Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI Z
Mar Nevs calling in Hobel Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre
Francis for Agns Ferger and H her me and Lain
Jung Y and the Samuel K Hes Mark Smith J
Tom Hummel S Friends, David Sloan Wilson, ya
de ro ro Diego, Jan Punter Romani Charlotte,
Bli Nico Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo Stassi Nale medicine
, Gary G Alman, Sam Ofri and YPJ Barboa
, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry
Franca Beto Lati Cortez Solis Scott Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman
, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki,
Georgio Theophano. Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams
Di Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey junior
, Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn. Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul
Barnabas Radis Mark Kemple Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris
to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica, Nicky
Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man George Katis,
Valentine Steinman, Perros, Kate Von Goler, Alexander
Albert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner
Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special
thanks to my producers is our web, Jim Frank
Luca Toni, Tom Veg and Bernard N Cortes Dixon
Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
John Carl, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden
. And to my executive producers, Matthew lavender,
Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all.